# ATtendance with facial Recognition 

## Abstract
Automatic face recognition (AFR) technologies have seen dramatic improvements in performance over the past years, and such systems are now widely used for security and commercial applications. An automated system for human face recognition in a real time background for a college to mark the attendance of their students. So Smart Attendance using Real Time Face Recognition is a real world solution which comes with day to day activities of handling students and employees. The task is very difficult as the real time background subtraction in an image is still a challenge.To detect real time human face are used and a simple fast Principal Component Analysis has used to recognize the faces detected with a high accuracy rate. The matched face is used to mark attendance of the students.Our system maintains the attendance records of employees automatically.

Manual entering of attendance in logbooks becomes a difficult task and it also wastes the time. So we designed an efficient module that comprises of face recognition to manage the attendance records of students. Our module enrols the student’s face. This enrolling is a one time process and their face will be stored in the database. During enrolling of face we require a system since it is a one time process. Student can have their own roll number as your studentid which will be unique for each student.The presence of each student will be updated in a database.

## Introduction
Maintaining the attendance is very important in all the institutes for checking the performance of students as well as employees. Every institute has its own method in this regard. Some are taking attendance manually using the old paper or file based approach and some have adopted methods of automatic attendance using some biometric techniques. But in these methods employees have to wait for long time in making a queue at time they enter the office. Many biometric systems are available but the key authentications are same is all the techniques. Every biometric system consists of enrolment process in which unique features of a person is stored in the database and then there are processes of identification and verification. These two processes compare the biometric feature of a person with previously stored template captured at the time of enrollment. Biometric templates can be of many types like Fingerprints, Eye Iris, Face, Hand Geometry, Signature, Gait and voice. Our system uses the face recognition approach for the automatic attendance of students in the classroom environment without others’ intervention. 

Face recognition consists of two steps, in first step faces are detected in the image and then these detected faces are compared with the database for verification. A number of methods have been proposed for face detection i.e. Ada Boost algorithm, the Float Boost algorithm, the S-Ada Boost algorithm Support Vector Machines (SVM), and the Bayes classifier. The efficiency of face recognition algorithm can be increased with the fast face detection algorithm. In all the above methods SURF is most efficient. Our system will utilize this algorithm for the detection of faces in the classroom background. Face recognition techniques can be Divided into two types Appearance based which use texture features that is applied to whole face or some specific Regions, other is Feature based which uses geometric features like mouth, nose, eyes, eye brows, cheeks and Relation between them. Statistical tools such as Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), Principal Component Analysis(PCA), Kernel Methods, and Neural Networks, Eigen-faces will be used for construction of face templates. Illumination invariant algorithm will be used  for removing the lighting effect inside the classroom.



# In order to run this project on your machine follow: 
1. Clone this project with the help of git clone < link of this repo >.
